Fig. 40.2 Factors involved in the cause of and association with outcomes of changes in renal function in heart failure. (A) Organ-specific factors. The main determinants of decreased glomerular filtration rate are a decrease in renal blood flow and an increase in central and renal venous pressure. The latter can be caused by intravascular congestion but also by an increase in intraabdominal pressure. Owing to increased renal venous pressure, renal interstitial pressure rises, which results in a so-called congested kidney, because the kidney is encapsulated (B and C). Renal artery stenosis is present in around 25% of heart failure patients, which can further compromise renal blood flow, especially in the presence of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibitors. (B) Glomerular factors. Decreased renal blood flow and low blood pressure trigger renal autoregulation, preserving the glomerular filtration rate by increasing the filtration fraction by increased efferent vasoconstriction. The use of RAAS inhibitors inhibits this process, which increases renal blood flow, but leads (in some patients) to a reduction in glomerular filtration rate (pseudo-worsening renal function). Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs inhibit prostaglandin synthesis, thereby impairing prostaglandin-associated increased or dependent renal blood flow. Increased interstitial pressure causes increased pressure in the Bowman capsule, which directly opposes filtration and in a glomerulus, where the filtration gradient is already low due to a decreased renal blood flow and increased renal venous pressure. Concomitant diseases have direct but differential effects on glomerular filtration, glomerular integrity, and podocyte function, as well as autoregulation. (C) Nephronic factors. Different therapies have different renal effects and exert their action at specific sites, as indicated in this diagram. Intravascular volume depletion (in the presence or absence of congestion) can lead to impaired renal perfusion and decreased glomerular filtration rate. The combination of increased interstitial pressure, reduced arterial perfusion, and concomitant disease, and therapies can cause tubular and glomerular injury. Increased renal venous pressure causes increased renal interstitial pressure, resulting in collapsing of renal tubules, which decreases the glomerular filtration rate and eventually leads to decreased urine output, sodium retention, and congestion. ACEi, Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin II receptor blocker; FF, filtration fraction; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; MRA, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; RAAS, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system; RBF, renal blood flow. (From Damman K, Tang WH, Testani JM, et al. Terminology and definition of changes renal function in heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:3413-3416. Reprinted with permission from Oxford University Press.)