Fig. 41.11 Pathology of the glomerulus and tubules in diabetic kidney disease (DKD).<sup>375</sup> (A) Classical pathologic mechanisms of DKD. It mainly includes hemodynamic, metabolic disturbances, and inflammation, which often interact with each other. 1. Hemodynamic disturbances lead to dysregulation of tubulobulbar feedback balance. 2. Metabolic disorders are crucial to the pathogenesis of DKD. Hyperglycemia affects pathways such as TGFβ1-RhoA/Roa pathway, RAAS, proximal tubular sodium and glucose reabsorption, and intracellular metabolism; abnorma lipid metabolism can affect the release of mediators such as cytokines and ROS; in the presence of nutrient overload in the organism, endo- plasmic reticulum autophagy leads to a chronic unfolded protein response, and mTOR also disturbs the podocytes leading to oxidative stress. 3. Inflammation promotes the release of inflammatory mediators such as adhesion molecules, chemokines, cytokines, and growth factors, causing renal infiltration of inflammatory cells. (B) Schematic representation of the pathologic damage of DKD. Differences in structural chang es of glomeruli and tubules in the diabetic setting and in the healthy state. Diabetic glomerulopathy is characterized by arterial hyalinization, thylakoid stromal deposition, basement membrane thickening, glomerular thylakoid cell hypertrophy and proliferation, podocytosis, proteinuria, tubular epithelial atrophy, activated myofibroblasts, and stromal accumulation. ANG2, Angiotensin II; BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; CCL, CC chemokine ligand; CXCL, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; ICAM-1, intercellular cell adhesion molecule-1; IL, interleukin; M-CSF, macrophage colony-stimulating factor; MIF, macrophage migration inhibitory factor; MIP-1, macrophage inflammatory pro- tein–1; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NFκB, nuclear factor κ-B; NOX, NADPH oxidase; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; RAAS, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SGLT2, sodium- dependent glucose transporters 2; TGF-β, transforming growth factor-β; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TWEAK, tumor necrosis factor–like weak in- ducer of apoptosis; VAP-1, vascular adhesion protein-1; VCAM-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.