Fig. 41.15 Mechanisms of kidney protection with SGLT2 inhibitors, GLP-1RAs, and a nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antag- onist (MRA).<sup>584</sup> (A) Hemodynamic changes in the diabetic kidney are reversed with SGLT2 inhibition. In diabetes, the resorptive capacity for glucose in the proximal tubule is increased via upregulation of SGLT2 and SGLT1. As a result of enhanced glucose and sodium chloride uptake in the proximal tubule, solute delivery to the macula densa cells of the juxtaglomerular apparatus is diminished, resulting in altered tubuloglo- merular feedback. Adenosine release is subsequently decreased resulting in vasodilation of afferent arteriola, glomerular hyperfiltration, and hypertension. SGLT2 inhibition deceases glucose/sodium reabsorption, thus increasing solute delivery to the distal tubule. These effects help restore tubuloglomerular feedback with a resulting increase in production of adenosine leading to vasoconstriction of afferent arteriola, with improvement of glomerular hyperfiltration and hypertension. (B) Structural changes observed in patients with diabetes and chronic kidney dis- ease include glomerular hypertrophy, thickening of the glomerular basement membrane, podocyte detachment and foot-process effacement, expansion of glomerular mesangial cell matrix, immune cell infiltration, and interstitial fibrosis. Treatment with SGLT2 inhibitors, GLP-1RAs, and ns-MRA helps restore podocytes and decreases extracellular mesangial matrix remodeling, immune cell infiltration, tubular damage, and inter- stitial inflammation and fibrosis. (C) The proposed effects of GLP-1RAs in kidney are predominantly mediated through activation of the GLP-1 receptor (GLP1R). Beneficial effects are principally related to suppression of inflammation and oxidative stress, reduced immune cell infiltration, and reduced fibrosis. Activation of the GLP1R reduces production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) via haem-oxygenase 1 (HO1) and reduces production of proinflammatory chemokines, cytokines, adhesion molecules, and profibrotic factors via inhibition of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) binding. ROS production is also reduced through a non–receptor-mediated reduction in nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase. (D) Overactivation of the MR in diabetes has further been implicated in the promotion of inflammation and fibrosis. Antagonism of the mineralocorticoid receptor with steroidal (e.g., spironolactone) and nonsteroidal (finerenone) MRAs suppresses expression of proinflammato- ry and profibrotic genes in macrophages, myofibroblasts, podocytes, and mesangial cells. cAMP, Cyclic adenosine monophosphate; GLP1, glucagon-like peptide 1; GLP1R, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor; GLP-1RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; HO1, haem-oxygenase 1; MR, mineralocorticoid receptor; NaCl, sodium chloride; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NF-ᴋB, nuclear factor-ᴋB; ROS, reactive oxygen species; ns-MRA, nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; SGLT-1, sodium–glucose cotransporter 1; SGLT-2, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2.