Fig. 72.10 Histopathologic characteristics in membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN) – immune complex-mediated (IC-MPGN) and C3 glomerulopathy (C3G). Also shown in this figure and frequently in the differential diagnosis are dense deposit disease (DDD) and postinfectious glomerulonephritis (PIGN). Panels highlight the microscopic features of (A-C) MPGN, (D-F) C3G, (G-I) DDD, and (J-L) PIGN by light microscopy (top row), immunofluorescence microscopy (middle row), and electron microscopy (bottom row). MPGN has typical features of glomerular lobular accentuation, mesangial expansion by matrix and cells, endocapillary hypercellularity, and capillary wall double contouring (A); coarse granular peripheral capillary and variable mesangial staining for C3 (B), invariably with one or more immunoglobulins (Ig), usually IgG and/or IgM; and mesangial and subendothelial deposits with cellular interpositioning and new basement membrane formation (C). C3G often shows a membranoproliferative (D) or mesangial proliferative pattern; dominant C3 staining (with little or no staining for immunoglobulin) in the mesangium and capillary walls (E); and a combination of mesangial, subendothelial, and subepithelial deposits, and often including subepithelial hump-type deposits (F). DDD can show an MPGN pattern (G) just as commonly as a mesangial proliferative, proliferative/exudative, or crescentic pattern; dominant glomerular C3 staining, often in a pseudolinear capillary pattern with mesangial coarse granules or rings (H); and pathognomonic electron dense transformation of the basement membrane (I), often also with mesangial deposits. PIGN shows a proliferative glomerulonephritis with prominent neutrophilic infiltration (J); mesangial and often spotty granular capillary staining for C3 (K), often with IgG; and subepithelial hump-type deposits with scattered mesangial and subendothelial deposits (L). A, D, and G: Periodic acid-Schiff ×400; J: hematoxylin and eosin ×400; B, E, H, K: C3 ×400; C and L: electron microscopy ×10,000; F: electron microscopy ×6000; I: electron microscopy ×4000. (A composite image of 12 panels (A-L) showing light microscopy, immunofluorescence, and electron microscopy findings for MPGN, C3G, DDD, and PIGN, illustrating their distinct histopathologic characteristics.)