Fig. 14.4 The glomerular and peritubular microcirculations. Left, Approximate transcapillary pressure profiles for the glomerular and peritubular capillaries in normal humans. Vessel lengths are given in normalized nondimensional terms, with 0 being the most proximal portion of the capillary bed and 1 the most distal portion. Thus, for the glomerulus, 0 corresponds to the afferent arteriolar end of the capillary bed and 1 corresponds to the efferent arteriolar end. The transcapillary hydraulic pressure difference (AP) is relatively constant with distance along the glomerular capillary and the net driving force for ultrafiltration (ΔΡ – Δπ) diminishes primarily as a consequence of the increase in the opposing COP difference (Δπ), the latter resulting from the formation of an essentially protein-free ultrafiltrate. As a result of the drop in pressure along the efferent arteriole, the net driving pressure in the peritubular capillaries (ΔΡ – Δπ, in which An is the change in transcapillary oncotic pressure) becomes negative, favoring reabsorption. Right, Hemodynamic alterations in the renal microcirculation in congestive heart failure (CHF). The fall in renal plasma flow (RPF) rate in heart failure is associated with a compensatory increase in AP for the glomerular capillary, which is conducive to a greater than normal rise in the plasma protein concentration and, hence, in An along the glomerular capillary. This increase in An by the distal end of the glomerular capillary also translates to an increase in An in the peritubular capillaries, resulting in an increased net driving pressure for enhanced proximal tubule fluid absorption, believed to take place in heart failure. The increased peritubular capillary absorptive force in heart failure also probably results from the decline in AP, a presumed consequence of the rise in renal vascular resistance. (From Humes HD, Gottlieb M, Brenner BM. The kidney in congestive heart failure: contemporary issues in nephrology. Vol 1, New York: Churchill Livingstone 1978: pp 51-72.)