Fig. 53.3 Model of erythropoiesis based on suppression of apoptosis by EPO and heterogeneity in erythropoietin (EPO) dependence among erythroid cells. From CFU-E through early basophilic erythroblast stages, erythroid progenitor/precursor cells depend on EPO for survival. The EPO-dependent period is left of the dotted line and encompasses three generations and two cell divisions. Each division is repre- sented by an arrow. In the post–EPO-dependent period, to the right of the dotted line, two cell divisions occur. Surviving cells in each generation are shown as circles containing large red dots representing intact nuclei. Cells succumbing to apoptosis are shown as circles containing Xs. The proportion of the total cells that survive is shown below each generation. The number of surviving cells in a generation results in twice that number of total cells in the subsequent generation. The final populations of cells shown on the right represent the anucleate, irregular reticulo- cytes. (A) Normal erythropoiesis, with average survival rates of 43% in the EPO-dependent generations, produces 200–250 billion reticulocytes daily. (B) Elevated EPO levels as found after acute blood loss or hemolysis increase survival rates to 56% in the EPO-dependent generation, and reticulocyte production rate more than doubles. (C) Decreased EPO levels, as found in renal failure, decrease survival rates to 32% in the EPO- dependent generation, and reticulocyte production is less than one-half of normal. (D) Ineffective erythropoiesis increases rates of apoptosis due to a pathologic process such as folate or vitamin B deficiency or β-thalassemia. High EPO levels in response to decreased erythrocyte production expand surviving cells in the early EPO-dependent generations, but the increased rates of apoptosis in the late EPO-dependent and post–EPO-dependent stages decrease daily reticulocyte production to less than one-third of normal. (E) Iron-deficient erythropoiesis with moderately elevated EPO activity for the degree of anemia slightly increases the survival rate during the EPO-dependent period, but influx from pre-EPO dependent stages is decreased as fewer MEPs are committed to erythropoiesis. In the post–EPO-dependent period, when hemoglobin is synthesized, heme-regulated inhibitor (HRI) prevents apoptosis by inhibiting general protein synthesis while enhancing the production of the mediator of stress erythropoiesis, the transcription factor ATF4. The inhibited protein synthesis decreases reticulocyte production rate, size, and hemoglobin content. (From Koury MJ, Blanc L. Red blood cell production and kinetics. In: Simon TL, Gehrie E, McCullough J, Roback JD, Snyder EL, eds. Rossi’s Principles of Transfusion Medicine. 6th ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell; 2022:133–142.)