Fig. 17.6 Integrated regulation of Na+-Cl and K+ transport in the distal convoluted tubule (DCT), connecting segment (CNT), and cortical collecting duct (CCD). (green arrowheads, activating pathways; red blunt end, inhibitory pathway). Left, Pathway in the setting of a low-Na+ diet, wherein angiotensin II (Ang II) and SGK1 signaling leads to phosphorylation of WNK4. This stimulates the phosphorylation of SPAK, which in turn phosphorylates and activates thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl cotransport in the DCT via the NCC. Stimulation of unknown receptors is hypothesized to cause phosphorylation of L-WNK1, which can also stimulate SPAK phosphorylation. L-WNK1 also has other functions: (1) It blocks the NCC inhibitory form of WNK4, thus activating NCC. (2) It inhibits the secretion of K+ via ROMK channels. Center, Normal diet. Right, Pathway in the setting of high dietary K+ intake, wherein aldosterone is stimulated and Ang II is low. In the absence of sufficient Ang II, the AT₁ receptor (AT₁R) cannot activate WNK4. This reduces SPAK activation and NCC phosphorylation. Dietary potassium loading also increases the level of the KS-WNK1 isoform to suppress the activity of L-WNK1. In consequence, the inhibitory effect of WNK4 on NCC dominates, blocking traffic of NCC to the apical membrane and thereby reducing NCC activity. KS-WNK1 also blocks the effect of L-WNK1 on ROMK endocytosis, causing ROMK to increase at the apical membrane. The net effect is that K+ secretion in the DCT, CNT, and CCD is maximized, whereas NCC is suppressed. Aldosterone stimulation of ENaC (not shown) offsets the decreased Na+ reabsorption by NCC, allowing robust potassium secretion without changes in sodium balance. The roles of WNK3, SGK1, and c-src cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases are not shown in the interest of clarity; see text for further details. NCC, NaCl cotransporter; ROMK, renal outer medullary K+ channel; SPAK, STE20/SPS1-related proline-alanine-rich kinase; WNK, with no (lysine) kinase. (From Welling PA, Chang YP, Delpire E, Wade JB. Multigene kinase network, kidney transport, and salt in essential hypertension. Kidney Int. 2010;77:1063-1069.)