Fig. 92.1 Typical Histomorphologic Appearance of Acquired Cystic Kidney Disease (ACKD) and Commonly Found Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) in ACKD. (A) The kidney shows numerous cysts of different sizes and prominent atrophy of kidney parenchyma. (B) At higher magnification global glomerulosclerosis, tubular atrophy with typical focal areas of thyroidization (i.e., intratubular periodic acid–Schiff [PAS]-positive casts), interstitial fibrosis, and arteriosclerosis (PAS-stained section) are noted. (C) Another area of the same kidney specimen as shown in part A, with two cysts. The right cyst is lined by inconspicuous and at this magnification invisible single-layered epithelium (C1). The left cyst (C2) is lined by a thick cell-dense layer (arrows), which at higher magnification (D) is characterized by tubular and papillary proliferation of atypical epithelial cells, characteristic for intracystic ACKD-associated RCC (H&E stained section). (E) Another tumor often found in ACKD is composed of well-differentiated clear cells in a papillary arrangement, characteristic for clear cell papillary RCC. (F) A clear cell RCC, a tumor commonly found in ACKD and the most common kidney tumor in the general population. It is composed of nests and sheets of atypical cells with clear cytoplasm. (G) Papillary RCC, another tumor commonly found in ACKD and the second most common RCC in the general population. It is composed of eosinophilic epithelial cells in a papillary arrangement. In this case the tumor size was 3 cm; therefore the diagnosis of papillary RCC (type 1) was made; if the size were less than 1.5 cm, the same histologic tumor pattern would be classified as papillary adenoma. In the presented cases and typical for ACKD, most clear cell and papillary RCCs in ACKD are well-differentiated, that is, the nuclei show little or no nucleoli and little nuclear pleomorphism. The scale bars in A–D represent 250 μm and in E–G represent 50 μm. The insets in A and C represent areas shown in higher magnification in B and D, respectively.