Fig. 14.2 Summary of the main anterior hypothalamic pathways that mediate secretion of arginine vasopressin (AVP) and oxyto cin. The vascular organ of the lamina terminalis (OVLT) is especially sensitive to hyperosmolality. Hyperosmolality also activates other neurons in the anterior hypothalamus, such as those in the subfornical organ (SFO) and median preoptic nucleus (MnPO), and magnocellular neurons, which are intrinsically osmosensitive. Circulating angiotensin II (Ang II) activates neurons of the SFO, an essential site of Ang II action, as wel as cells throughout the lamina terminalis and MnPO. In response to hyperosmolality or Ang II, projections from the SFO and OVLT to the MnPO activate excitatory and inhibitory interneurons that project to the supraoptic nucleus (SON) and paraventricular nucleus (PVN) to modulate direct inputs to these areas from the circumventricular organs. Cholecystokinin (CCK) acts primarily on gastric vagal afferents that terminate in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NST) but, at higher doses, it can also act at the area postrema (AP). Although neurons are apparently activated in the ventrolateral medulla (VLM) and NST, most neurohypophyseal secretion appears to be stimulated by monosynaptic projections from A -C cells, and possibly also noncatecholaminergic somatostatin-inhibin B cells, of the NST. Baroreceptor-mediated stimuli, such as hypovolemia and hypotension, are more complex. The major projection to magnocellular AVP neurons appears to arise from A cells of the VLM that are activated by excitatory interneurons from the NST. Other areas, such as the parabrachial nucleus (PBN), may contribute multisynaptic projections. Crania nerves IX and X, which terminate in the NST, also contribute input to magnocellular AVP neurons. AC, Anterior commissure; OC, optic chiasm; PIT, anterior pituitary. (From Stricker EM, Verbalis JG. Water intake and body fluids. In Squire LR, Bloom FE, McConnell SK, et al, eds. Fundamenta Neuroscience. San Diego: Academic Press; 2003:1011−1029.)