Fig. 49.1 Overview of the Molecular Basis of Salt Handling Along the Nephron in the Four Main Functional Subunits of the Tubule. Note that Na+,K+-ATPase is expressed on the basolateral aspect of the epithelial cells along the entire nephron, establishing the electrochemical gradient for Na reabsorption and providing an exit pathway for Na. In contrast, on the apical side, segment-specific transporters and channels provide the entry pathway for Na into the epithelial cells. Salt transport in the proximal tubule: The majority of filtered salt (roughly 70%–80%) is reabsorbed here through a variety of transporters. The electrochemical gradient for Na is used as driver for a number of transport processes, thereby linking Na reabsorption to acid-base and phosphate homeostasis, as well as glucose and other substrate transport. Salt transport in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the loop of Henle: Approximately 10% to 20% of filtered Na is reabsorbed in this segment with the furosemide-sensitive Na+-K+-2Cl− (NKCC2, variants of which cause Bartter syndrome type 1) cotransporter providing entry into the epithelial cell. Apical K recycling through the KCNJ1 (ROMK) channel (the cause of Bartter syndrome type 2) ensures the efficient functioning of NKCC2 and helps establish a lumen-positive transepithelial voltage that drives paracellular cation reabsorption. Chloride exits the cell through basolateral Cl channels, predominantly CLCNKB (the cause of Bartter syndrome type 3). The β subunit (Barttin, cause of Bartter syndrome type 4) is crucial for normal functioning of CLCNKB. Salt transport in the distal convoluted tubule (DCT): Approximately 5% to 10% of filtered Na is reabsorbed in this segment via the thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl-cotransporter (NCCT, the cause of Gitelman syndrome) on the apical side. Note the presence of the same chloride channel (CLCNKB) on the basolateral side as in TAL. This explains why pathogenic variants in this channel cause Bartter syndrome type 3 (a disorder of TAL) but can phenocopy Gitelman syndrome (a disorder of DCT). Salt transport in a principal cell of the collecting tubule: Approximately 2% to 5% of filtered Na is reabsorbed in this segment via the amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium Na channel (ENaC). Loss-of-function variants in this channel cause pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1), whereas gain-of-function causes Liddle syndrome. Na uptake is indirectly coupled to K (through ROMK) and proton secretion through the H+-ATPase in the neighboring intercalated cell. Aldosterone activates the mineralocorticoid receptor, which increases the activity of ENaC and Na+,K+-ATPase, which increases Na reabsorption and K and proton secretion, resulting in hypokalemic alkalosis. Cortisol is also a ligand for the mineralocorticoid receptor but is normally removed by oxidation by 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase to cortisone. ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; WNK, with-no-lysine kinase. (From Hoenig MP, Zeidel ML. Homeostasis, the milieu interieur, and the wisdom of the nephron. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;[9]:1272–1281.)