Fig. 10.17 Axial gradients of solutes in relation to nephron seg- ments in the rat kidney in an antidiuretic state. Osmolality, urea concentration, and sodium concentration (plus accompanying anion) are shown (scale at right); also, loop of Henle and collecting duct populations (scale at left). IC, Inner cortex; IM, outer part (base) of inner medulla; OM, outer medulla; P, papilla or inner part (tip) of inner medulla; U, urine. The density of loops of Henle and collecting ducts decreases in inner medulla because collecting ducts merge and loops turn back. The axial osmolality gradient is steeper in the outer medulla and papilla than in the outer part of the inner medulla. The gradient is steepest in the papilla, where the osmolality and concentration pro- files appear to increase exponentially. The shape of the sodium pro- file has been corroborated by electron microprobe measurements.<sup>499</sup> Figure is based on published data. Curves connecting data points are natural cubic splines.<sup>500</sup> Dashed curve segments are interpolations without supporting measurements. Tubule populations in papilla are from reference 501; tubule populations in outer medulla are based on estimates in reference 49. Concentrations and osmolalities are from tissue slices and urine samples collected 4.5 hours after onset of vasopressin infusion at 15 μU/min per 100 g body weight and are derived from figure 5 in reference 502 and figures 1, 3, 9 in reference 452; slice locations were given in reference 8. The osmolality reported in the inner cortex seems high relative to the reported plasma concen- tration of 314 mOsm/kg H O. The osmolality and concentration pro- files, as drawn in reference 452, apparently do not take into account relative distances between tissue sample sites. (From Sands JM, Layton HE. The urine-concentrating mechanism and urea transporters. In: Alpern RJ, Caplan MJ, Moe OW, eds. The Kidney: Physiology and Pathophysiology. 5th ed. San Diego: Academic Press; 2013:1463–1510)