Fig. 45.6 Hypothetical pathways upregulated (green) or downregulated (red) in PKD and possible treatment targets. The molecular cas- cade driving the progression of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). Initiated by PKD variants, aberrant crosstalk between calcium (Ca) and cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling pathways disrupts cellular homeostasis. This disruption enhances cAMP and protein kinase A (PKA) signaling through the activation of Ca-inhibitable adenylyl cyclases and inhibition of calcium-dependent phosphodiesterase 9. The ensuing PKA-induced effects include the perturbation of intracellular calcium balance, phosphorylation of endoplasmic reticulum calcium cycling pro- teins, and the activation of CFTR, leading to Cl and water secretion, thus enhancing fluid secretion. PKA activation exhibits contrasting effects on cell proliferation in wild-type and PKD cells. Calcium modulation, through deprivation or delivery, reverses these effects, proposing a mecha nism involving PI3K inhibition and the regulation of transcription factors governing cell progression and energy metabolism. Disease progression in ADPKD is further fueled by factors such as mislocalized EGFR, overexpressed growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, and their receptors. Abnormal miRNA expression is linked to disease advancement, with miR-17 controlling various target genes in proliferative signaling pathways including PPARA and mTOR and directly repressing PKD1, PKD2, and HNF-1β transcripts, thereby contributing to reduced gene expression and cyst formation. This comprehensive illustration provides insights into the interconnected molecular events shaping the complex pathogen- esis of ADPKD. AC6, Adenylate cyclase 6; AMPK, AMP-activated kinase; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; AVP, vasopressin; CaMKK, calcium calmodulin-dependent protein kinase; CDK, cyclin-dependent kinase; EGF, epidermal growth factor; ERK, extracellular signal-regulated kinase; Gi, inhibitory G protein; Gq, a G-protein subunit; Gs, stimulatory G protein; GSK3β, glycogen synthase kinase 3β; HIF, hypoxia-inducible factor; IGF1, insulin growth factor 1; IP3R, inositol 1,4,5 triphosphate (IP3) receptor; LKB1, liver kinase B1; MEK, mitogen-activated protein kinase ki- nase; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; PC1, polycystin-1; PC2, polycystin-2; P2R, purinergic 2 receptor; PLC, phospholipase C; Rheb, Ras Homolog enriched in brain; RSK, ribosomal s6 kinase; RYR, ryanodine receptor; Sirt1, sirtuin 1; SOC, store operated channel; STAT3, signa transducer and activator of transcription 3; STIM1, stromal interaction molecule 1; SSTR, somatostatin receptor; TKIs, tyrosine kinase inhibitors; TSC, tuberous sclerosis proteins tuberin (TSC2) and hamartin (TSC1); TZDs, thiazolidinediones; V2R, vasopressin V2 receptor.