Fig. 4.2 Anatomy of the glomerular filter. (A) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of podocyte major processes (MPs) and secondary interdigitating foot processes (FPs). (B) Scheme and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of three-layered glomerular filtration barrier con- sisting of 1. podocyte FP covered by a glycocalyx, the specialized cell–cell contact called slit diaphragm (SD) connecting the interdigitating foot processes; 2. the three-layered glomerular basement membrane consisting of podocyte-derived lamina interna, the podocyte/endothelia cell–derived lamina densa and the endothelial-derived lamina externa; and 3. the glomerular endothelial cells (GEnC) with the large fenestrae and thick glycocalyx. (C) Scheme of the typical sagittal view of two foot processes, showing three-layers of ∼25 nm long strands, which are attributed to neph1 (blue color and 5 IG repeats) and one layer of ∼40 nm long strands that represent nephrin (red color, and 9 IG repeats). (D) Scheme of podocyte foot process proteins constituting 1. foot process cytoskeleton (actin/myosin filaments, the actin binding proteins synaptopodin, α-actinin-4); 2. the podocyte adhesion complex (α3/ β1Integrin connecting the GBM to focal adhesions constituted of FAK = focal adhesion kinase, ILK = integrin linked kinase, T = talin, V = vinculin, P = paxillin, EPB41L5 = Ferm domain protein EPB41L5); 3. matrix interacting proteins dystroglycan, sarcoglycan; 4. the slit diaphragm (with the transmembrane proteins nephrin, neph1, FAT1/2 and P-cadherin, and the scaffolding protein ZO-1 = zonula-occludens 1, the intracellular signaling hub constituted of podocin, TRPC6 = transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily C, member 6 and the connection to the actin cytoskeleton through CD2AP = CD2-associated protein, the cytoskeletal adaptor protein Nck, the multidomain scaffolding protein MAGI-1, and the junctional cell adhesion protein JAM4), and with signaling molecules such as receptor kinase MERTK, atrial natriuretic peptide receptors (ANPRs, receptor-mediated signaling), ITM2B = integral membrane protein 2B (amyloid pre cursor protein regulation); 5. the negatively charged sialoprotein podocalyxin (which is connected to the plasma membrane by NHERF-2 = Na+/ H+ exchanger regulatory factor 2 and ERM = ezrin/moesin/radixin proteins) localizes to the surface of the plasma membrane, as do GLEPP-1 = glomerular epithelial cell membrane protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1, podoplanin, and podoendin; Of note, GLEPP-1 was recently also identified within the slit diaphragm protein network. 6. the G-coupled receptors AT1R = angiotensin receptor 1 and PGR = prostaglandin receptor; 7. the podocyte antigens, PLA R1 = phospholipase A2 receptor 1, THSD7A = thrombospondin type 1 domain-containing 7A , and NEP = neutra endopeptidase identified in antenatal and adult membranous nephropathy; 8. the extracellular protease ADAM10; and 9. intracellular signaling molecules Rho, Rac, mTORC1/2 = mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 and 2, Notch and Fyn. (A and C: All TEM and SEM from mouse glomeruli are from Oliver Kretz, Hamburg, Germany. B: From Onions KL, Gamez M, Buckner NR, et. al. VEGFC reduces glomerular albumin permea bility and protects against alterations in VEGF receptor expression in diabetic nephropathy. Diabetes. 2019; 68(1):172–187.)