Fig. 69.4 B-cell ontogeny and differentiation. Most peripheral B cells are produced in the bone marrow and referred to as B2 cells. A minor B-cell population, known as B1 cells, are found not only in the pleural and peritoneal cavities but also in small numbers in the spleen. B1 cells express CD19, high levels of CD5, and produce low-affinity natural antibody (mainly IgM), without T-cell help. It is currently unclear whether B1 cells arise from a unique progenitor or from a progenitor common to both B1 and B2 cells. B2 cells are formed in the bone marrow and develop from pro-B cells, to pre-B cells, to immature B cells, which are released into the periphery. Following antigen encounter, B cells obtain T-cell help and enter the germinal center. Here they undergo class switch recombination and affinity maturation, a process involving iterative cycles of somatic hypermutation and proliferation. A specific subset of T cells, known as T follicular helper cells (Tfh) are critical for germinal center formation and are thought to provide both contact and cytokine (IL-21) signals for germinal center B cells. Short-lived plasmablasts and memory cells arise from GC B cells. Some plasmablasts circulate (depending on the expression of CXCR3 and CXCR4), and a small proportion find a suitable niche for long-term survival within bone marrow and inflamed tissue, for example, rejecting allografts. A variety of molecules are expressed by B2 cells during their maturation and activation, as shown; Fcy RIIB is expressed throughout development, whereas most other markers are expressed either on B cells or on antibody-producing plasma cells. Dark-blue bars represent high expression, light-blue bars intermediate expression. Regulatory B cells are a recently described subset, which inhibits T-cell responses via the production of IL10. These cells are likely to arise from multiple B-cell subsets (B1, transitional and marginal zone). Regulatory B cells have recently been described in humans and are characterized by surface expression of CD5, CD1d, CD24, CD27, and CD38. There are also thought to be regulatory B cells, which act independently of IL-10 (not shown). (From Clatworthy MR. Targeting B cells and antibody in transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2011;11(7):1359-1367. With permission.)