At least 20 microscopic fields, in different areas of the samp hould be examined at both low magnification (e.g., ×100 or ×20 and high magnification (e.g., ×400). More extensive examination m be required in certain clinical settings, such as isolated microhematur of unknown origin, for which we suggest examination of 50 low-pow fields (lpf) to look for erythrocyte casts.19 For correct examination, both pH and SG of the sample must b known. Both alkaline pH (≥7.0) and low SG (especially ≤1.010) fav he lysis of erythrocytes and leukocytes, which can cause discrepanci between dipstick readings and the microscopic examination (see ea ier discussion). Alkaline pH also impairs the formation of casts an avors the precipitation of amorphous phosphates. On the contrar high SG (≥1.030) may reduce the sensitivity of reagent strips for hem globin and leukocyte esterase. We quantify the particles seen as number per microscopic fiel whereas if counting chambers are used, the elements are quantified b l BOX 4.1 Standardized Procedures for Preparation and Examination of Urine Sediment Used in the Authors’ Laboratory • Written instructions for the patient to deliver a correct urine sample (i.e. the second urine of the morning after discarding the first portion of urine [midstream urine] collected in a proper container). • Sample handling and examination within 3 hours of collection. • Macroscopic examination of the sample and sediment. • Testing the urine sample with a reagent strip for specific gravity, pH, albu min, hemoglobin, leukocyte esterase, and nitrites. • Centrifugation of a 10-mL aliquot of urine at 400 g for 10 minutes. • Removal of 9.5 mL of supernatant urine. • Gentle but thorough resuspension with a Pasteur pipette of the sediment in the remaining 0.5 mL of urine. • Transfer by a precision pipette of 50 μL of resuspended urine to a glass slide. • Covering of sample with a 24 × 32 mm glass coverslip. • Examination of the urine sediment with a phase contrast microscope at low (×160) and high magnification (×400). • Use of polarized light to identify doubtful lipids and crystals. • Matching of the microscopic findings with reagent strip results. • Cells expressed as lowest/highest number seen per high-power field, casts as number per low-power field, and all other elements (e.g., bacteria, crys tals) on scale from 0 to ++++.