Fig. 15.11 Mechanisms underlying the pathophysiology of the triphasic pattern of diabetes insipidus (DI) and the isolated second phase. (A) In the triphasic response, the first phase of DI is initiated following a partial or complete pituitary stalk section, which severs the connections between the AVP neuronal cell bodies in the hypothalamus and nerve terminals in the posterior pituitary gland, thus preventing stimulated AVP secretion (1 degree). This is followed in several days by the second phase of syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), which is caused by uncontrolled release of AVP into the bloodstream from the degenerating nerve terminals in the posterior pituitary (2 degrees). After all the AVP stored in the posterior pituitary gland has been released, the third phase of DI returns if more than 80% to 90% of the AVP neuronal cell bodies in the hypothalamus have undergone retrograde degeneration (3 degrees). (B) In the isolated second phase, the pituitary stalk is injured, but not completely cut. Although the maximum AVP secretory response will be diminished as a result of the stalk injury, DI will not result if the injury leaves intact at least 10% to 20% of the nerve fibers connecting the AVP neuronal cell bodies in the hypothalamus to the nerve terminals in the posterior pituitary gland (1 degree). However, this is still followed in several days by the second phase of SIADH, which is caused by the uncontrolled release of AVP from the degenerating nerve terminals of the posterior pituitary gland that have been injured or severed (2 degrees). Because a smaller portion of the posterior pituitary is denervated, the magnitude of AVP released as the pituitary degenerates will be smaller and of shorter duration than with a complete triphasic response. After all the AVP stored in the damaged part of the posterior pituitary gland has been released, the second phase ceases, but clinical DI will not occur if less than 80% to 90% of the AVP neuronal cell bodies in the hypothalamus undergo retrograde degeneration (3 degrees). (From Loh JA, Verbalis JG: Disorders of water and salt metabolism associated with pituitary disease. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2008;37:213-234.)