Fig. 8.10 In chronic kidney disease, the intestinal role of uric acid transporters (mainly ABCG2) becomes much more important. Sche- matic of urate excretion in the setting of normal renal function versus that in which there is diminished renal function. In normal situations, the majority of urate excretion (∼70%) is performed mainly in the proximal tubule of the kidney and is mediated by a number of transporters found on the apical and basolateral membranes of the proximal tubule cell. The illustration depicts only some of the transporters involved and includes members of the SLC and ABC families of membrane transporters. On the basolateral surface, the uptake of uric acid from the blood is mediated mainly by OAT1 (SLC22A6) and OAT3 (SLC22A8). These solute carrier transporters exchange dicarboxylates (DCs) for urate, resulting in the net movement of this organic anion into the proximal tubular cell. At the apical surface, a number of transporters including ABCG2 (depicted here), NPT1 (SLC17A1), and NPT4 (SLC17A3), as well as ABCC family members, work to secrete urate into the tubular lumen for excretion via the urine. The relative importance of the aforementioned apical transporters in urate secretion remains unclear. Transport of urate via ABCG2 is driven through ATP hydrolysis. Several other apical membrane transporters are well established in the reabsorption of urate including URAT1 and SLC2A9v2. URAT1, or SLC22A12, exchanges intercellular organic anions for urate, resulting in the movement of uric acid back into the proxima tubule cell. Meanwhile, under normal physiologic conditions, up to 30% of uric acid is excreted via extrarenal transporters, believed to largely be driven by ABCG2 expressed in intestinal epithelial cells. The results of the analysis of human data—and physiologic data from rodent models with renal dysfunction—support the view that urate transport by ABCG2, most likely in intestine, compensates for poor renal urate handling in the setting of diminished kidney function. (Modified from Bhatnagar V, Richard EL, Wu W, et al. Analysis of ABCG2 and other urate transporters in uric acid homeostasis in chronic kidney disease: potential role of remote sensing and signaling. Clin Kidney J. 2016;9:444–453.)