Fig. 8.3 Contribution of SGLT2 and SGLT1 to renal glucose reabsorption. (A) Left panels: Free-flow collections of tubular fluid performed by micropuncture to establish a profile for fractional reabsorption of glucose versus fluid along accessible proximal tubules at the kidney surface. Glucose reabsorption is absent in the early proximal tubule of Sglt2–/– mice but enhanced in the later proximal tubule, potentially reflecting compensation by SGLT1-mediated transport. Right panel: Renal inulin clearance studies revealed that the reduction in fractional renal glucose reabsorption in Sglt2–/– mice was inversely related to the amount of filtered glucose. (B) In metabolic cage studies, the SGLT2 inhibitor em- pagliflozin dose dependently increased glucose excretion in wild-type (WT) mice. The response curve was shifted leftward, and the maximum response doubled in Sglt1–/– mice. The difference between dose-response curves, which reflects glucose reabsorption via SGLT1 in WT mice, was maintained for higher doses (all vertical lines have same length), consistent with selectivity of the inhibitor for SGLT2 versus SGLT1 in this dose range. Glucosuria is initiated in WT mice when SGLT1-mediated glucose uptake is saturated (red arrow). (C) Renal inulin clearance studies in mice lacking Sglt1, Sglt2, or both Sglt1 and Sglt2 indicated that the glucose reabsorption preserved in Sglt2–/– (∼40%) is mediated by SGLT1. Application of the SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin at low and high doses to establish free plasma concentrations (corresponding to early tubular concentrations) close to IC for mouse SGLT2 (∼1–2 nM) or 10-fold this concentration confirmed the role of SGLT1 during pharmacologic SGLT2 inhibition. (Data from Vallon V, Platt KA, Cunard R, et al. SGLT2 mediates glucose reabsorption in the early proximal tubule. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;22:104–112; and Rieg T, Masuda T, Gerasimova M, et al. Increase in SGLT1-mediated transport explains renal glucose reabsorption during genetic and pharmacological SGLT2 inhibition in euglycemia. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2014;306:F188–F193.)