Fig. 14.5 Intercalated Cells: Three different intercalated cell types have been identified: type A intercalated cells, type B intercalated cells, and non–type A/non–type B intercalated cells. Each is rich in carbonic anhydrase II and is capable of generating abundant HCO3− and H+ from H2CO3. Type A intercalated cells: H+ is secreted into the lumen mainly via V-type H+-ATPase and to a smaller extent via H+-K+-ATPase. The generated cytoplasmic HCO3− moves into the peritubular capillary in exchange for Cl−, via anion exchanger 1 (AE1; a product of the Solute Carrier Family 4 Member 1 [SLC4A1] gene). This transporter is also called the erythrocyte membrane protein band 3 when it is located in red blood cells. Type B intercalated cells: H+ is secreted into the peritubular capillary by V-type H+-ATPase in the basolateral membrane (the same proton transporter as found in type A intercalated cells but in the opposite, or luminal, membrane). The HCO3− generated in this cell is secreted into the lumen via an anion exchanger named pendrin (a product of the Solute Carrier Family 26 Member A4 [SLC26A4] gene), which exchanges 1 HCO3− for 1 Cl−. Pendrin is a distinct and different exchanger than the AE1 present in the basolateral membrane of the type A cells. A Na+/3 HCO3− cotransporter AE4 (anion exchanger 4; a product of the Solute Carrier Family 4 Member A4 or [SLC4A4] gene) is present in the basolateral membrane. These cells also have the sodium-driven bicarbonate chloride exchanger (NDBCE; a product of the Solute Carrier Family 4 Member A8 [SLC4A8] gene) in the luminal membrane (see later discussion). Non–type A/non–type B intercalated cells: this is the third type of intercalated cell. Both a V-type H+-ATPase, pumping H+, and pendrin, exchanging HCO3− for Cl− coexist in the lumen membrane. AE4 is a major Na+/3 HCO3− transporter in the basolateral membrane, moving these ions into the peritubular capillary. Although intercalated cells were originally identified as major kidney acid-base–regulating cells, it is now clear that these cells also play an important role in salt and volume regulation.32,33 The NDBCE in the luminal membrane of the type B intercalated cells is an electrically neutral ion exchanger moving 1 Na+ and 2 HCO3− ions into the cell while moving 1 Cl− into the lumen. The net effect of two pendrin cycles (2 HCO3− ions enter the lumen in exchange for uptake of 2 Cl− ions) and 1 NDBCE cycle (2 HCO3− ions and 1 Na+ ion enter the cell and 1 Cl− ion enters the lumen) has the net effect of the reabsorption on 1 NaCl molecule. These acid-base and salt reabsorption interactions of intercalated cells may explain why some patients with Pendred syndrome, a genetic defect of pendrin, develop severe salt depletion and metabolic alkalosis when treated with thiazide diuretics.34 (Pendrin is also a major transporter in the ear, and patients with Pendred syndrome are usually congenitally deaf.)