Fig. 72.8 Complement and its link to disease. Complement activation via the lectin, classical (immune complexes), or alternative pathway (constitutively active) resulting in C3, followed by C5 activation, terminal pathway activation and formation of the MAC (Cb-9; for details, see text). Alternative pathway: a small amount of C3 is constantly activated and turned into C3b. If not inhibited, C3b leads via an amplification loop to the activation of C5 followed by the induction of the terminal pathway and the formation of the MAC, C5b-9. Physiologically, C3b is immediately inactivated via plasma or endothelial cell membrane-anchored regulators (such as CFH, CFI, MCP, CR1) and cleaved to become C3d-g. aHUS: aHUS is caused by unrestricted activation of the complement alternative pathway on vascular endothelial cells. Loss-of-function mutations in genes encoding complement regulators (such as CFH, CFI, MCP), gain-of-function mutations of complement activators (such as C3, CFB), or CFH autoantibodies result in a shift of the balance between C3 activation and inactivation toward C3 activation with subsequent induction of the terminal pathway. C3 glomerulopathy: C3 glomerulopathy is caused by an overactive C3 amplification loop, which can be caused via gain-of-function mutations in components of the C3 convertase complex, C3bBb (such as C3 and CFB), loss-of-function mutations in C3 amplification regulators (such as CFH, CFHRs, CFI, MCP), autoantibodies inhibiting complement regulators (such as CFH), or stabilizing complement activators (such as CFB, C3NeF). Accordingly, excessive amounts of C3b metabolites (C3d-g) are generated, which deposit in the glomerular filter and cause a local inflammatory response. aHUS, Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome; C3NeF, C3 nephritic factor; CFB, complement factor B; CFD, complement factor D; CFH, complement factor H; CFI, complement factor I; CFP, properdin; CR1, complement receptor 1; DAF, decay-accelerating factor; Ig, immunoglobulin; MAC, membrane attack complex; MCP, membrane cofactor protein. (A series of diagrams illustrating the complement system pathways (lectin, classical, alternative) and how dysregulation leads to aHUS and C3 glomerulopathy through different mechanisms of overactivation.)