Fig. 8.5 Proposed mechanisms of kidney and heart protection by SGLT2 inhibition in type 1 and type 2 diabetes. SGLT2 inhibition attenuates the primary proximal tubular hyperreabsorption in the diabetic kidney, which increases/restores (1) the signal of the tubuloglomerular feedback at the macula densa ([Na+/CI/K+]MD) and (2) the hydrostatic pressure in the Bowman space (PBOW). This lowers glomerular hyperfiltration with beneficial effects on tubular transport work and thus oxygen consumption and the filtration of albumin. By lowering blood glucose, SGLT2 inhibitors can reduce kidney growth and inflammation and albuminuria. SGLT2 inhibitors have a modest osmotic diuretic, natriuretic, and uricosuric effect, which can reduce extracellular volume (ECV), blood pressure, serum uric acid levels, and body weight. SGLT2 inhibition blunts an expected reactive increase in sympathetic nerve activity (SNA). SGLT2 may be functionally linked to the Na+-H+-exchanger 3 (NHE3) such that SGLT2 inhibition may also inhibit NHE3 in the proximal tubule. SGLT2 inhibition lowers insulin levels (therapeutic need and/or endogenous) and increases glucagon levels, which increases lipolysis and hepatic gluconeogenesis. These metabolic adaptations reduce fat tissue/body weight and the hypoglycemia risk and induce a mild ketosis, which all may be beneficial for the kidney and cardiovascular system. The hypoglycemia risk is further reduced by SGLT1-mediated glucose reabsorption. SGLT2 enhances active glucose and Na+ reabsorption in the outer medulla; this may enhance hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-induced genes and have kidney and cardiac protective effects through enhancing erythropoietin, hematocrit, and oxygen transport. Black arrows indicate consequences of SGLT2 inhibition, and red arrows demonstrate direction of changes in the associated variables. "?" indicates hypotheses that need further confirmation. (This figure was modified with permission from Vallon V, Thomson SC. Targeting renal glucose reabsorption to treat hyperglycaemia: the pleiotropic effects of SGLT2 inhibition. Diabetologia 2017;60:215-225.)