Fig. 10.9 Key events that contribute to the regulation of aquaporin-2 (AQP2) trafficking. The canonical pathway involves interaction of vasopressin with the type 2 receptor (V2R) on the basolateral surface of the principal cell. This increases cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) formation after Gas stimulation of adenylyl cyclase (AC). Phosphorylation of AQP2 occurs initially on residue S256, via protein kinase A (PKA) activation. After vasopressin stimulation, residue S261 on AQP2 is dephosphorylated, and residue S264 and S269 phosphorylation is increased. During exocytosis AQP2 interacts with soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) proteins and their regulatory proteins such as Munc18-2, and these interactions may be regulated by phosphorylation. At the cell surface, phosphorylated AQP2 is present in endocytosis-resistant domains, and its interaction with heat shock protein/heat shock cognate 70 (hsp/hsc70), which is required for clathrin-mediated endocytosis, is inhibited. The myeloid and lymphocyte protein (MAL) also is involved in AQP2 endocytosis by an as-yet-unknown mechanism. Endocytosis of AQP2 is also facilitated by protein kinase C (PKC) activation (but possibly not by direct phosphorylation of AQP2), as well as by activation of dopamine (DA, D₁), prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and PGE2 receptor type 3 (EP3). However, constitutive exocytosis of AQP2 occurs without vasopressin stimulation and does not require AQP2 phosphorylation on residue S256. Accumulation of AQP2 at the plasma membrane is increased by inhibiting clathrin-mediated endocytosis. AQP2 phosphorylation can also be increased by stimulating the cyclic guanosine monophosphate/protein kinase G (cGMP/PKG) pathways using, for example, nitric oxide (NO). Extracellular hypertonicity activates the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and p38 MAP kinase activities are all required for AQP2 surface accumulation after acute hypertonic shock. Finally, AQP2 trafficking involves the actin cytoskeleton, and actin depolymerization results in cell surface accumulation of AQP2 without the need for vasopressin stimulation. ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; GC, guanylyl cyclase; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; SNAP23, synaptosomal-associated protein 23; VAMP-2, vesicle-associated membrane protein 2.