Fig. 52.6 Concept of the role of the extrarenal 1α-hydroxylase. The metabolism of vitamin D in the context of the cells involved is shown. Upper right, Proximal tubular cell showing the key elements in the uptake of 25(OH)D and its conversion to 1α,25(OH) D . Megalin/cubilin are cell surface receptors that execute endocytosis of the vitamin D–binding protein (DBP)–25(OH)D complex, and CYP27B1 is the main compo- nent of the 1α-hydroxylase, responsible for making 1α,25(OH) D . Middle left, Simple target cell that takes up 1α,25(OH, the vitamin D response element [VDRE]) D as the free ligand originally ferried to the target cell bound to DBP. The picture shows the key elements of the transcriptional machinery, as well as some representative gene products, including the cell division protein p21, the bone matrix protein osteopontin, the cal- cium transport protein calbindin, and the autoregulatory protein CYP24A1. Lower right, Target cell expressing extrarenal 1α-hydroxylase, which possesses megalin/cubilin machinery to take up the DBP–25(OH)D complex and also expresses CYP27B1, enabling it to make 1α,25(OH) D intracellularly and also to respond in a likewise manner to the simple target cell because it also possesses the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and other transcriptional machinery. The expectation is that cells involved in cell differentiation or in control of cell division require higher concentrations of 1α,25(OH) D in order to modulate a different set of genes and that the CYP27B1 boosts local production to augment “circulating” 1α,25(OH) D arriving from the kidney in the bloodstream. With normal physiologic processes, locally produced 1α,25(OH) D would not enter the general cir- culation, although in pathologic conditions (e.g., sarcoidosis) it might. At this time, it is not clear how many cell types can be considered simple target cells and how many possess the CYP27B1 and megalin/cubilin to allow for local production of hormones. mRNA, Messenger RNA; RXR, retinoid X receptor. (From Jones G. Expanding role for vitamin D in chronic kidney disease: importance of blood 25-OH-D levels and extra-rena 1α-hydroxylase in the classical and nonclassical actions of 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D Semin Dial. 2007;20:316–324. With permission.)